At this point, you should know
that the word “playwright",
in fact,
was used as a form of insult.
The one who coined the term "playwright"
was Ben Jonson.
A renaissance--
He didn’t see himself as a playwright,
but as a renaissance poet.
He wanted to separate the real poets
from the lowly writers aspiring to be poets.
Because Ben Jonson,
like Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe,
they wrote dramatic poetry
for themselves as dramatists.
When their work is produced,
we know it's for the king.
They were known as poets.
Shakespeare was a poet or at least
was considered as a poet at that time.
Ben Jonson used the term
"playwright" to say,
"You are not a poet."
"You're just a playwright.
You only know how to construct a play."
"You don't have a way with words."
The "wright" in playwright
does not mean "to write".
Notice that the spelling is w-r-i-g-h-t
as in “shipwright”.
A shipwright makes ships.
Or a millwright makes machines.
A plowwright makes plows.
A playwright only makes plays.
You construct a play.
You don't write
because you're not
"good with words".
Today, we all know
that the modern playwright
doesn’t have to be poetic
or to write poetry,
especially given the many forms
of plays and styles and genres.
When the age of realism took place,
the playwright’s reason
for writing changed.
It's no longer just to write poetry,
but to let ordinary people's voices be heard
and to show how
they talk on stage.
When realism came along,
the playwright's work couldn't be labeled
as "poetry" in the strictest sense.
Eventually, the word evolved.
Writers like me,
we accepted being called playwrights.
And we made it...
Respectable.
If you can call this a respectable career.
Like for example,
one of my mentors, Rene Villanueva
He started as a poet.
He joined a group of poets.
He kept on writing poetry
until a colleague told him,
“You’re not a poet,
you’re only a playwright.”
As if repeating what Ben Jonson said
hundreds of years ago.
Rene accepted that.
And he became one of the most important
playwrights in the Philippines.
So playwriting found its own place
in the field of drama and literature.
Amazing, right?
It’s like the playwright
is standing on two different fields.
Now, how is this important?
Being a playwright doesn’t mean
accepting the insult of being in words.
In fact, the playwriting tradition formed
and developed itself throughout the world
because it thoroughly found
different strategies to use language.
Finding different forms of speech,
several ways on what the characters can say,
through actors.
The playwriting tradition
created different language strategies.
Even here in the country.
Actually, the whole history of playwriting
is really filled with revelations
and an evolution of different forms
of language strategies.
This is for you to set up
an emotional impact for the audience.
We know that this kind of tradition
of playwriting is modern.
This started from the colonizers
who arrived in the country.
Besides that,
it created its own category.
that's different
from writing a novel.
Novelists can write what I call logorrhea,
the diarrhea of words.
You can write anything
with great length.
But you can get lost in the written words
because it's only being read.
Okay?
Not just read,
but because it’s being read.
When you’re sleepy
or you need to eat
or you need to fetch your child,
you have to put the book down.
When a play is performed,
you can't just leave and come back.
If you don’t like what’s happening,
you walk out.
The theater can't be closed for you.
Unlike theater,
reading is a personal experience.
You don’t need people
when you read.
Watching a play requires an audience
to watch the whole thing.
That’s the difference in intention.
When writing for a play,
you need to know the intention.
One of the pros and cons
if you’re a novelist
if what you wrote is bad,
there's no one to blame but you.
But if you’re a playwright,
you can blame the director, the actor.
You just have to prove
that you’re right
by making a new version
of the play you wrote.
“It's supposed to be this way.”
Right?
So that's it.
It's also different from writing a film
by the very same reason.
When you make a film,
I'm a screenwriter,
but I'll say this nevertheless.
screenwriters are not
the ones in control of the film
It’s really a director’s medium.
The root of film is photography,
which is why the visual is supreme.
Maybe we'll find out
along the way
that's where a disjunct
occurs at times.
For example, when a playwright like me
will enter into screenwriting
and vice-versa.
For example, in Jmee's scene
where there's a "voice over."
Voice over is relatively
more cinematic than theatrical.
If you watch the plays from long ago,
the voice-over is rarely used.
But that's because microphones
didn't exist yet.
So you have to shout it out loud.
At the same time, it's unheard of
when you're a director
who's unfamiliar
with the concept of cinema,
why would you do a voice-over
when a person's already there?
Just put her on top.
If she's supposed to be god,
then god should be there talking.
That's why I asked you, right?
Let's say the character is alone
and then she hears something.
She doesn't know who.
Suddenly, when she turns around,
she's face to face with someone.
If you notice the consciousness of the writing,
it's cinematic.
It requires, for it to be the
most effective way of saying it,
it requires a cut.
It requires a cutaway, right?
When you turn around,
it's like oh you're already there!
But in theater, the actor
is forced to enter the stage.
So even before she speaks,
the punchline is already given away.
Something like that.
That's the difference.
Always take note of that.
I think you'll realize the importance
of how you're going to write this
based from where the craft of playwriting
and screenwriting came from.
Playwriting goes way, way back
while screenwriting is much recent.
So these are the differences
and similarities of playwriting to poetry.